[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
PABLO SHMERKIN: So let's
recall where we were last time.
So we are trying to prove
Bourgain's projection theorem.
I guess I will state
it again later.
But last time, we hopefully
accepted the following fact
as true.
OK, so maybe if a
subset of 0, 1 is--
OK, so given S is 0, 1, there
exists eta epsilon positive
depending on S. And if we have
a set, which is an S delta,
delta to the minus
eta set, then there
exists a little A in the set
such that the size of A plus
little a, a grows by
delta to the minus epsilon
compared to the size of a.
So Larry pointed out,
OK, so initially,
instead of this, we have
some polynomial q of A,
such as aA minus aA.
So Larry pointed out to me that
if you follow exactly what you
did in the finite-field setting
to go from q of a to this,
you need to use the
non-concentration condition
that we are trying to prove.
But it is possible to do it in
a way, which is not circular.
So OK, so I said,
I was not going
to cover all of the details.
So using Plunnecke-Ruzsa--
so Plunnecke-Ruzsa
is the main tool, and
suitable double counting,
one can really prove this
without using something
that we haven't proved yet.
OK, and the goal
is to improve this
by showing that A
plus aA satisfies
a better non-concentration
condition that
will allow us to iterate.
So the goal is to show
that A plus aA actually
contains because it is not
true that it always is, but it
contains a delta S plus
epsilon delta to the minus
maybe let's call
it eta prime set.
So the eta can get
worse when one iterates.
But one iterates
finitely many times.
So this is not serious.
OK.
OK, maybe for a different.
So the epsilon is
also going to change.
OK, so I'm basically
going back to what
I did at the end of last time.
But I was rushing a bit.
So I'm going to be a bit
more precise, hopefully.
Suppose that A is delta S delta
to the minus eta square set.
Well, in particular, it is an
S delta, delta to the minus--
so I guess delta goes first.
In particular, it
is a delta S delta
to the minus eta set because
eta is a very small number.
But why did I square it?
Because then, it is OK.
And as we saw last
time, if we take
a subset of a which
is uniform, delta m
uniform for some
good choice of delta,
delta will have to be chosen
small enough in terms of eta,
but nothing else.
Then, so we may assume
let's call it delta uniform.
Or delta depends on eta.
So that basically,
this doesn't change.
Maybe one has to multiply by 2.
But essentially,
it doesn't change.
Well then, this set,
because it's uniform now,
is also rho, is
delta to the minus
eta squared z for every who.
And then this implies
that it is also
a row is rho to the minus eta.
So the problem here is
that now, we have rho here,
but we still have delta here.
But we replace eta
by eta squared so
that we can have also rho here.
And this will be for every
who between delta and delta
to the eta, right?
Because we started with delta
to the minus eta squared.
OK, we don't go all the
way to 1, but almost.
Eta is very, very small.
So morally, this is almost 1.
So from here to here,
we use the uniformity.
So one consequence of uniformity
that I explained last time
is that a uniform delta z is
also a rho set for every rho.
And this is just
trivial inequality
using that rho is at
most delta to the eta.
OK, so this means that we
can apply what we've already
know for every scale rho
between delta and delta
to the eta, because it
satisfies the assumptions.
And another thing that
I explained last time
is that even though
a priori, we only
know that there exists an
A so that A plus aA grows,
by applying that to
the set of exceptions,
we get that this
is true for almost
every A in a strong sense.
So if we put all of these
together, what we get is that--
OK, so maybe let's
recall what I just said.
So in fact, the set
of A. OK, so let's
work with some finite set of
rhos, which are powers of delta
again.
So we have delta, delta
squared, up to delta,
to some maybe m prime.
So that this is equal
to delta to the eta.
And recall that little
delta is delta to the m.
So m prime is less than
m, but it is close to m.
And again, this is a finite
set of scales, but not really
finite, because OK.
It is finite, but
it grows with delta.
But it grows
logarithmically with delta.
So m is logarithm of little
delta in base, big delta.
Big delta is fixed.
So it's logarithmic in delta.
And m prime is smaller.
So it's also
logarithmic in delta.
OK, so for each rho, we
know that the set of A's
so that A plus rho
A doesn't grow.
Sorry.
little a, but measurable
scale rho doesn't
grow by rho to the
minus epsilon has
size at most rho to the
eta times the size of A.
And why is this true?
Because if this was
not true, then we
could apply the statement
above to the scale rho
to the set of exceptions to this
set, and get a contradiction.
OK, and this is very
small in terms of delta.
So rho to the eta is, at
most, delta to eta squared.
Sorry.
Here, OK.
OK, so here, we are
counting a set of A's.
So the only way in which we can
really count a set of A's is
by measuring some scale.
Otherwise, it could be infinite.
So we always have
to choose a scale.
So scale rho.
OK, rho to the eta is, at
most, delta to the eta squared.
And this means that--
sorry.
This is wrong.
Let's go back and fix it.
So delta is too large.
So delta is a constant.
So I want to be away from 1, not
away from 0, but away from 1.
So the rhos that we
consider are delta
to the m, which is little
delta, delta to the minus 1.
And then we stop at
delta to the eta.
Sorry about that.
OK, because we are only looking
at logarithmically many values
of delta, OK, one has to work
a little bit more because here,
we are measuring
things at scale rho.
But rho is far away from 1.
And there are only
logarithmically many values
of rho.
So putting all
together, what we get
is that for all A outside
of a small set, maybe
something like a set of size
delta to the eta, I don't know,
cubed times the size of A. We
get that A plus little aA grows
for every scale in this family.
OK, and now, it
looks like we are
getting close
because, well, we want
to show that this contains delta
S plus epsilon something set.
And a necessary condition
is that we have growth
at every scale.
So if you have a delta S
plus epsilon something set,
then this will be true.
And if we knew that
this set is uniform,
we would be done,
because for uniform set,
the condition of
growing at every scale
is necessary and sufficient.
But we don't know that
this set is uniform.
So we are not done yet.
So we are getting closer,
but we are not done yet.
Any questions?
So this is more or less
where we were last time.
OK, so in order to
be able to finish,
we still have to work a bit.
And there was a claim, that
I was explaining last time,
that we can improve this.
So here, we are
projecting A times A.
So this is pi A of
A times A. So we
can improve this to project
an arbitrary dense subset
of A times A. So claim, if
g is contained in A times A.
And it has size at scale delta.
Let's say delta to the eta
squared, or something like this,
relative to A times A,
then Pa of G already grows.
And in fact, we will also want
to apply it at many scales.
Or maybe not.
We'll see.
OK, let's start
with scale delta.
Then we'll see what
we actually need.
Then this already grows,
let's say by epsilon over 2.
OK, and I guess
at this stage, we
claim that there
exists such an A.
But once again, if
there exists an A,
then it is true for
nearly all A by applying
the fact that there exists
an A to the exceptional set.
So we can play this game
as many times as we want.
And we want to
play it many times.
OK, so last time, we were in
the middle of proving this.
So let's start again.
Assume that 1 is in A.
This is just to avoid to--
OK, just for
notational simplicity.
It's not important.
Well, if A equals
1 works, we are
done because we are trying to
show that some element of A
works.
So if the element 1 happens
to work, we are happy.
Otherwise, 1 doesn't work.
And the fact that 1
doesn't work means
that there exists G, which
is dense in A times A,
and such that pi 1 of G
doesn't grow too much.
And this, OK.
So all of these
together are exactly
the assumptions of
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
or rather the delta
covering number
of Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
But as I explained a
couple of lectures ago,
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
works exactly the same
for delta covering numbers.
So maybe let's recall
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
for delta-covering numbers
if A at scale delta has size
N, and there exists G
contained in A times
A such that the size of G at
scale delta is at least 1 over K
times the size of A
plus A at scale delta.
And if we project in
the direction 1, this G,
this doesn't grow a lot compared
to the size of A. If all of this
is true, then there exists a
set A prime contained in A,
which is fairly dense.
So the size of at scale
delta is at least K
to minus a constant
times the size of A.
And A prime has a small subset.
The doubling constant for
A prime is, at most, K
to a constant power times
the size of A prime.
OK, this is
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
Well, here, we can take
well, N is just the delta
covering number of
A, and we can take
K to be the minimum between eta
squared, delta to the minus eta
squared, and delta to the minus
epsilon over 2, which is really
delta to the minus eta squared.
You should imagine that eta
is smaller than epsilon,
even before squaring.
OK, so we apply by
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
and let A prime be
the corresponding set.
OK, and then A prime is dense
in A, and has small subset.
OK, so A prime is a
dense subset of A. A
is a delta S something set.
So A prime is also a
delta S something set,
because we saw that subsets
of delta A something
sets or delta S something
sets where the constant.
So basically, you have to
multiply the constant by this.
But A was a delta S delta
to the epsilon square set.
So this is still a delta
S delta to the minus
O of epsilon squared set.
So we can apply what
we've know to A prime.
So A prime is a delta S delta to
the minus O of eta square set.
So there exists A--
an A prime, sorry, such that A
prime plus alpha A prime grows.
By applying the fact from
the beginning to A prime,
it still satisfies
the assumptions.
We have lost a constant
here, but this is harmless.
Any questions so far?
OK, and now, we apply
something that you've seen
in the finite-field setting.
And again, this works
exactly the same way
for delta covering sets.
What you saw in the
finite-field setting
is that if you have a set
with the smallest subset.
So small pi 1 projection.
And large pi A projection, then
in fact, the pi A projection
remains large if we
pass to a dense subset
of A prime just times A prime.
OK, so this is another recall
from the finite-field story.
If A prime plus A
prime, let's say again,
it grows by, at most, K. And
A prime plus little A prime,
let's say, so A prime
has small doubling.
But if you apply projection
by A, it grows by something.
Then in fact, this implies that
for every G in A prime times
A prime, which is dense, let's
say dense with threshold 1
over K, everything measured
with delta covering numbers,
the projection is still large.
And I think it's K to
minus some constant.
And the L deal
basically survives.
Does this look like
something you've seen before?
OK, does it look
like something that--
OK, well, go back to your notes,
or otherwise, just believe me,
this is true.
Larry told me you've seen
something like this, maybe
with different letters.
Very likely with
different letters.
But the point is have a
set of small doubling,
but large pi A projection.
Then the pi A
projection is large,
even after passing
through a subset.
OK, so it looks
like we've almost
won because look at the claim,
and look at what we have here.
OK, have we really won?
Not exactly, because
the claim was for A,
and we got it for A prime,
which is a dense subset of A,
but it is not A. So one has
to work a bit to really win.
But you will have to trust me
that one can win from here.
So the claim was
that, what we obtain
for A prime is true for A.
And we got it for A prime,
not for A. So we'll briefly
explain how to get it for A.
But I will not do
all of the details,
because otherwise,
we'll be here forever.
Maybe let's keep the
objective inside.
OK, we can upgrade.
A prime to A.
And the idea is, well, either
A prime is A, in which case,
we win.
Or if A prime is not all
of A, but it is almost all
of A, in the sense that A
minus A prime is really small,
we still win because so if the
difference between A and A prime
is really small, you just apply
trivial bounds on the very
small part, and we still win.
So if A minus A prime is
very small, very small maybe,
of size less than delta to the
plus eta, something like this,
times the size of
A, we are fine.
Otherwise, do the same.
So apply the same argument
to A minus A prime.
If A prime is not very dense
in A, then A minus A prime
is still a delta S delta to
the minus eta square set.
And we can do the same
and get a new A prime.
So maybe the original A prime,
we can call it A prime 1.
And if we apply the same
thing, we get an A prime 2.
Now at the same time, I have to
play the game that if something
is true for 1A, it's true for
nearly all A because we found
that there exists an A, and
there exists an A prime.
But in fact, there
are lots of A's.
But the A prime
could depend on A.
So one has to be a
little bit careful.
But one can play this game.
And eventually, one gets,
so all of these sets
have large size because
they are dense in A prime.
Or is it A prime is dense in A?
So at some point, and
they are all disjoint,
they are all disjoint because
we take away the previous ones
when we apply this again.
So at some point,
we reach a step
where we have exhausted almost
all of A. Let's say something
like this.
And then we stop.
OK, but I'm cheating
here because--
and then we stop.
And then basically, we win
because if we have a set
G which is dense in A times A--
OK, we still don't
really win yet.
But if I said G is
dense in A times A,
it will be dense in AI
prime times AG prime, maybe
a different prime.
OK, so one still has to work.
OK, plus some work.
Plus more work.
And I'm basically ignoring
the little a here.
But it's OK to ignore the
little a because everything
you prove from one little a is
true for nearly all little a.
Maybe forget what I
said, but OK, this
is one thing you have to do.
Just iterate, so iterate this.
Here, we get a dense A prime.
We want to get all of
A, not a dense A prime.
We iterate, plus
some double counting.
We get that plane.
Any questions?
So one has to work here.
So I haven't proved it.
So I don't expect
you to see the proof.
So one thing you have to
do in the proof is iterate.
But you have to do more things,
and double count carefully.
But eventually, one gets that.
So one is able to
upgrade A prime to A. OK,
so that claim is true.
So that claim says
that there exists an A.
And once there is one A, there
are many A's, nearly all A's,
so that the pi A projection of
any dense subset of A plus A
grows.
And now, we are really close
to the end of that goal.
So A plus little aA is
not necessarily uniform,
but we know that it
contains a uniform subset.
And when we pass to
a uniform subset,
we can make it large for any
subadditive function, set
function mu.
OK, so this is the mu
we are going to use now.
So mu of B is going to be, OK.
So fix little a for
which the claim holds.
So this is the claim star.
So we fix a little a
so that this holds.
And then mu of B, and
here, B is a subset of 0,1,
so it's a subset of A really,
is the delta covering number not
of B, but of pi A inverse of B.
So this is subadditive, right?
Because what is
mu of B1 union B2?
Well, if you take
primitives, you
get something which is contained
in the union of the primitives.
And then the delta covering
number is subadditive.
AUDIENCE: Isn't pi inverse
of E intersecting cross A?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yes.
Sorry.
Thank you.
So this is finitely subadditive,
because delta covering number
is subadditive.
And we are just taking delta
covering number together
with the preimage, which
is really subadditive.
OK, so by lemma from last time,
by the uniformization lemma
from last time, there
exists on A prime
contained in A, which is
uniform, sorry, not in A. Ah.
There exists in B contained
in a plus little aA.
So we are going to
apply uniformization
to a plus little aA.
We are trying to show that
this set contains a delta S
plus epsilon set.
So this is our ultimate goal.
And we know that if
this set was uniform,
it would be enough to show
that it grows at every scale
to reach the conclusion.
So we want to make
it uniform, but we
need to know that the uniform
subset grows at every scale.
OK, so by uniformization,
there exists a B
in A plus little aA,
such that this mu of B
is larger than delta to
the minus eta squared
times the measure of A plus aA.
And what is the
measure of A plus aA?
This is just the delta
covering number of A times A.
So this is the delta covering
number of pi A inverse of B. So
this is a--
sorry.
Again, I forgot to
intersect with A times A.
So this is the G to which
we can apply the claim.
So this is a dense
subset of A times A.
And we know that for every dense
subset of A times A, the pi
A projection grows.
In particular, the pi A
projection of this grows.
But this is by A inverse.
So if we apply pi A
again, we land in B.
And in particular, we
land in A plus little aA.
But in particular, we land
in B, which is uniform.
OK, so I apply claim
star to G equals
pi I inverse of B
intersection A times A,
that satisfies the
density assumption.
And this is because uniform
sets can be taken dense.
So again here, I have to
choose maybe a different delta
than before, although I
guess the same delta works
because it's the
same numerology.
So this is true.
We can take uniform
sets, which are
as dense in the exponential
sense as we want.
This is exactly
what's going on here.
OK, and the conclusion is that
the delta covering number grows.
Sorry.
Not pi A of B. Ah.
Pi A of A times A
intersected with B, I guess.
OK, so we are one step
closer because now,
we have a uniform
subset of A times aA.
And the delta covering number--
well, I guess B is
a subset of these.
So here, one will have just B.
So the delta-covering number
grows.
We know that if
a set is uniform,
and the rho covering
number grows for every rho,
and in fact, we
don't need every rho,
it's enough to consider rhos,
which are powers of delta.
Then they are delta S
plus the growth set.
So we just repeat.
So here, we have
something for delta.
But then, OK.
Let's see what is the
right order to do this.
So I want to claim that
what we did for delta,
we can do for any scale.
So there is nothing
special about delta.
Because A itself is uniform, all
of these that we did for delta,
we can do it for
any other scale rho.
But the uniform set that we
get can depend on the scale.
So what is the right
order to do this?
So the goal is to use the
lemma from last time that
says that if it is uniform,
and the rho-covering number is
large for every row, and
in fact, one doesn't need
every, every rho, it's
enough to consider powers
of the delta base
in the uniformity,
then it is a delta S
set, where the S comes
from the size of the
rho-covering numbers.
And OK, by using this
idea for every rho,
so we did it for delta,
but the assumption
is called for
every rho, at least
for every rho which is
not very close to 1.
So we can do the same.
The only danger is that
we could get a different B
for different rhos.
We could get different B's.
I'm not very happy about this.
So how do we deal with this?
One thing one could try to do,
but I think we lose too much,
is OK, delta is delta to the m.
Now we want to go to
delta to the m minus 1.
So we could just
replace A plus aA by B.
But then we will have
another subset of B,
and we are going to use
this factor logarithmically
many times.
And that is true many times.
So yeah.
I don't want to do that.
It would lose too much.
OK, so there is
something I'm missing.
And I'm not going to
figure it out right now.
So because I told
you that-- yes.
AUDIENCE: Can you prove
the claim simultaneously
for all scales, replace
that delta by rhos,
all the different rhos?
And then I think
that would fix it.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yeah,
you want to have
the same G for every scale?
AUDIENCE: Yes.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Like if you could
prove that stronger claim,
then it will solve it.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yes.
But why can't we get the
same G for all the scales?
OK, because I told you I
wouldn't give a complete proof,
and just a sketch of
some of the ideas,
but here is a sketch
of some of the ideas.
And it's something
technical that--
so really, the ideas
are what I explained.
And we're missing
something technical.
It's not fundamental.
I would say just to summarize
what's been going on,
I still have to explain
once we prove that goal,
how to continue with the rest
of Bourgain's original theorem.
But this is really the
most difficult step
where things really change
from the finite-field setting.
OK, so let me sort
of briefly explain,
again, everything
that's been going on.
So we know that A plus aA grows.
But we want to show that it
also satisfies a stronger
non-concentration
assumption, that the S
in the non-concentration
assumption also grows.
OK, first, we can
take A to be uniform.
If A is uniform, then
we know that A itself
is a rho S set for every rho.
And this allows us
to reach conclusions
for every scale rho, which is
something that we have to use.
In the step that
I'm missing as well.
We used it before, but clearly,
we have to use it again.
And then we know that A plus
little aA grows at every scale.
If it was true that a plus
little aA was uniform,
then we would win,
because for uniform sets,
we saw last time that if they
are large at every scale,
then they satisfy the
corresponding non-concentration
condition.
So we have to take a
large uniform subset of A,
but large with respect to what?
Well, large with
respect to this.
Because this is what allow us to
use the fact that if we project
something dense in A
times A, then we grow.
And how do we know that if
we inject something dense
in A times A, then we grow?
We have to combine two things.
The first
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So for Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
we just
take an arbitrary element of
A, in this case, we took 1,
but it can be an
arbitrary element of A,
we apply Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So either that
element already works
and we are done for the claim
star, or if it doesn't work,
then we are under the assumption
of Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
We apply Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers,
and then we
end up with the
set that satisfies
the assumption of
something else that you've
seen in the finite-field
setting, which
is that if you have
a very small subset,
an expansion under pi A, then
this expansion under pi A
is robust under
pass into subsets.
So in either case, we get that
pi A of dense subset of A times
A is large.
And this allows us to use
uniformity with this mu.
So that's a bit of a summary of
the main steps to show the goal.
OK, plus technical details.
I can recall right
now, sorry about that.
This implies the goal.
The goal?
That goal.
OK, why did you spend so
much time towards this goal?
Because now, we can iterate.
We knew that if A is a delta S
delta to the minus epsilon set,
then A plus A grows.
But not only it
grows, it contains
the delta S plus epsilon delta
to the minus eta prime set.
And then we can iterate.
So A plus little
aA is our new A.
So iterating A goes to A
plus aA for every epsilon--
Maybe let's not call it epsilon.
For every tau, there exists a
polynomial that depends on tau.
It's a very large degree
if tau is close to 0
such that Q tau of A
is a delta 1 minus tau.
So the S can become
arbitrarily close to 1.
Delta to the minus
some eta tilde,
that depends on how many
times you have to iterate set.
And by is, I mean, contains.
Yes.
AUDIENCE: You said
that the epsilon
is going to change [INAUDIBLE].
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yeah, I
think instead of epsilon,
it's epsilon over 2.
AUDIENCE: So but then if
the epsilons are shrinking,
how are you getting
arbitrarily [INAUDIBLE]?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yeah,
that's a good question.
So OK.
Epsilon, in some
sense, is shrinking.
But OK, so there is
one epsilon, which
is the epsilon for the
size of A plus little aA.
And there is potentially
a different epsilon
if we want to find a
delta S plus epsilon
set inside a plus little aA.
Those two epsilons, I
think one is epsilon,
the other is epsilon over 2.
But the point is that they
depend on S continuously,
both of them.
So they can be taken to be
continuous functions of S.
Because they are
continuous functions of S
as long as S is less
than 1 minus tau,
S is bounded away from 0.
So we reach 1 minus tau
in finitely many steps.
Maybe let's write this here
because it's important.
So epsilon is, or can be taken,
continuous function of S.
So remains bounded below as long
as S is bounded away from 1.
So we can achieve this by
iterating finitely many times.
OK, and why is this good?
Because this allows us to
do instead of A plus aA,
now we can do x plus aX,
where x is potentially much
bigger than a.
So the next step, and I think
this step is the same as
in the finite-field setting.
So I'm basically just
going to state it.
If x is a delta t--
OK, x is 0, 1 still.
And x is a delta.
Maybe let's call it u.
So u is going to
be t over tau soon.
Delta t to the minus
epsilon set on A is 0,1.
It's delta S. Maybe let's
write eta here for consistency.
Delta to the minus eta set.
So now, instead of one set,
we have two sets potentially
of very different sizes.
And OK, they are both
strictly bigger than 0,
and strictly less than 1.
And the interesting case
is when S is less than u.
So this is the case that
we don't already know.
Then there exists little A in
A such that x plus little aX
grows.
It grows by some epsilon
that depends on S and u.
OK, so just briefly,
so the idea,
and again, I think
you've seen this
in the finite-field setting.
But the idea is that it's
true for maybe not for A,
but it's true for Q
tau of A. And here, you
have to take tau so that Q
tau of a is bigger than x.
So we can take tau, for
example, to be 1 minus u over 2.
Something like this.
Then this is much
bigger than x in size.
So these are sets.
But it has size
much bigger than x.
Once the set of directions
has size much bigger than x,
we can do double
counting and get growth
with this instead of this.
But once we get growth for
a polynomial instead of A,
we apply Plunnecke-Ruzsa
one million times,
and we go back down
to A. OK, then apply
Plunnecke-Ruzsa triangle
inequality, double counting.
And then it is also true for A.
So this part is really
exactly the same.
So we already had to go from
Q of A to little a before.
So initially, we proved that aA
A minus aA A is bigger than A.
And we use that to show that A
plus little aA is bigger than A.
So it's the same reduction here.
And I think you've seen
something very similar
in the finite-field setting
and modulo technical details.
This part is the same.
But in order to get
here, it's important
that we can make this
set bigger than x.
This is what we
wanted to iterate.
Potentially, x is
much bigger than A,
but we can expand
A by a polynomial
so that it becomes
bigger than x.
And for this, we had to iterate.
This is why we worried
so much about iterating.
OK.
OK, the next step is to prove
Bourgain's prediction theorem.
OK, I'm not going to
do the full proof,
but just basically
recall what you
did in the finite-field setting,
and explain, again, where one
has to be a little bit careful.
But hopefully, by now, you will
not be so worried about the part
where you have to be careful.
So proof of Bourgain's
projection theorem.
OK, now I regret
calling this xx.
But it's too late.
So let x be in the unit
ball of R2 delta t delta
to the minus eta set, where
eta is very, very small.
And t is between 0 and 2.
Let D be a set of directions,
which is a delta S
delta to the minus eta set.
And what is the goal?
So what is the claim of
Bourgain projection theorem?
It is that there exists some
a and D such that pi a of G
exceeds the trivial
bound by some epsilon.
And the trivial bound is the
square root of the delta.
OK.
Sorry.
In the version that
I stated, the size
of x is delta to the minus t.
So it matches the
non-concentration condition.
So here, we can just write
delta to the minus t over 2.
This is the square
root of the size of x,
which is the trivial bound.
And we exceed it by some
delta to the minus epsilon.
And this is true for every G,
which is dense in A times A.
OK, so this is Bourgain's
projection theorem.
This is what we want to prove.
OK, so in the
finite-field setting,
I think to prove a
similar statement,
what you did is first
consider three fix--
well, just pick three
directions in D.
In order to apply
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So again, it's similar
to what we did before.
Either things already
work, or we can
apply Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
Here, we have to be careful
about how we choose the three
directions, because if the
three directions that we choose
are very close to each other,
this is going to be bad news.
We're going to lose a lot.
So well, even
though this is 0,1,
we can sort of change
coordinates so that 0,1
and infinity are in D.
And this can be
done in a way where
we don't lose too much
using that D is spread out.
Because of this
non-concentration conditions,
there are three
points in D which
are far apart from each other.
And that means that if we
send these three points that
are far apart from
each other to 0, 1,
infinity, so these
are really the slopes.
They are not the angles.
They are slopes.
So this can be done with a
linear change of coordinates
of distortion.
So the distortion is the norm
of the corresponding matrix
delta to the minus O of eta.
So this distortion
is, because eta
is much smaller than epsilon.
If we have a gain, well, we
have to decrease the gain
by what we lose in this
change of coordinates.
But this is mild.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] A to be
pi, 0, union pi infinity of x?
PABLO SHMERKIN: We are.
We are going to look at
the vertical and horizontal
projections of x
and the pi 1 of x.
AUDIENCE: Yeah, I'm
just saying there's
A cross A in the
statement of the theorem.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Oh, sorry.
Sorry.
In x.
AUDIENCE: X cross x?
PABLO SHMERKIN: In x.
x is in R2.
In x.
x is a two-dimensional object.
AUDIENCE: And the
point is you want
to try to prove this
using A equals sub pi
0, union pi infinity x?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yes.
Yeah, that's the point.
But yeah.
So sorry.
There was a typo here.
So x is already two dimensional.
And what we have been doing,
we have a Cartesian product.
Or here, we have a Cartesian--
OK.
But [INAUDIBLE].
So OK, we want to apply
this, which unfortunately,
is going to be hidden.
OK, so x, this x, is going to
be some-- the projection of x,
horizontal projection
of the x in R2.
So it's really similar to
the finite-field setting.
So I'm skipping details.
I'm going to continue
skipping details,
mostly focusing on
the differences.
So one difference
is that we have
to be careful with the three
directions that we take.
If they are too
close to each other,
the distortion
will be too large,
and it can be so large
that we lose all the gain.
But because the
set of directions
is spread out by the
non-concentration condition,
we can do it in such a way that
the distortion is controlled.
OK, so now, x is contained
in x1 times x2, where
this is the
horizontal projection,
and this is the
vertical projection.
So if, because we are assuming
that also one is in D, if one
works, we are done.
Because we are trying to
show that something works.
So the claim is that
there exists an A and D
with this property.
So if we are so lucky that one
has this property, we are done.
If one doesn't work,
so this is very
similar to what we did a
bit earlier, but somehow,
we have to do it twice.
Once to do the iteration
for A plus little aA,
and then again, to
conclude the proof.
If one doesn't work,
then there exists some G,
which is dense in x1 times x2.
OK, sorry.
Why is it dense in x1?
Ah.
OK, actually, yeah.
This is more complicated.
So one has to be careful.
So OK.
So I want to assume
that x1 has size
roughly square root of the
size of x with the idea
that if it had size bigger than
the size of x, we would win.
But in fact, in order to
reach this conclusion,
we have to apply the
electromagnetic hours already,
because the conclusion
we want is not
only that the
projection of x grows,
but the projection of every
dense subset of x works.
So OK.
So one really has to do is apply
value of electromagnetic hours
three times.
So maybe for 0, infinity,
and 1, in this order,
either it works or we apply
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
to replace x by x prime,
and then x double prime,
and x triple prime.
OK, I'm not going to
do all of the details,
but did something
like this happen
in the finite-field setting?
I think it also, this
part has to be done
in the finite-field setting.
So--
AUDIENCE: We didn't do this
strong version in detail.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Oh, OK.
We didn't do the strong
version in detail.
OK, also, I'm not going to do
the strong version in detail
because the 20 minutes
I expected to take
are turning into the
whole lecture again.
But I'm leaving today.
So now, I really have to finish
it over the next 20 minutes.
So OK.
So OK, either 0, 1,
or infinity, or I
guess 0, infinity, or 1
work, or in each case,
we can apply
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers and pass
to dense subsets of x of x and
the corresponding projections
of x.
So Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers-- OK.
So let's take 0.
If the horizontal projection
has the property we want,
we are done.
Otherwise, there exists
a dense subset of A
with a small
horizontal projection.
But you can imagine that
the horizontal projection
is another projection.
So it's the same thing we did
last time, we did a bit earlier.
And then we have to replace x by
some x prime, and then by some
x double prime, and then
by some x triple prime.
So I'm not going
to do it in detail.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, I see many of
you are confused.
And that's OK because one
has to do it carefully.
It's not obvious how to
do it, but it can be done.
OK, so eventually, after
renaming the set back to x,
we are in the following
situation, this situation where,
OK, let me just
write it here, where
the horizontal and vertical
projections have size, at most,
delta to the minus epsilon,
t over 2 plus epsilon.
OK, I guess let's say we apply
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers twice.
So we don't apply
it to pi 1 yet.
OK, just to see how
this goes, so suppose
that pi 1, so suppose
that one doesn't work.
Suppose that one doesn't work.
And that means that
pi 1 of G doesn't grow
for some dense subset of x.
And if it's a dense
subset of x, it
is a dense subset
of x1 times x2.
This is x1.
This is x2.
So this is x1.
OK, then we're going to
apply Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So here, you see that
we are in this setting
to apply Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So we're going to apply
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So it looks like after
applying Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
lots of times, and I
skipped the details,
but you have to trust me
that this can be done,
we are in the setting where
we can apply this and be done.
But not so fast.
What's the issue?
Why not so fast?
So all of the part that
I'm not explaining here,
you also have to do it in
the finite-field setting
if you want to get the stronger
statement that the projection
of a dense subset grows, not a
dense subset of the given set.
If you want to prove that
in the finite-field setting,
you have to do this multiple
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So this is not a
difference, OK, you
haven't done it in detail
in the finite-field setting.
But this part is
not a difference
between the finite-field setting
and the Euclidean setting.
But there is something
which is a difference.
So what is the issue?
Why can't we just apply, oh, OK.
We can apply this.
But why do we have to be
careful about applying this?
Yes?
AUDIENCE: So if we apply
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers,
we get A prime plus A prime.
And then [INAUDIBLE] y cross y.
That covers a lot
of G. And then if I
want to apply what's
on the left board,
I would need to know that y
is a delta u something set.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Exactly.
So here, we have a
Cartesian product.
OK, so one small issue is
that instead of x1 times x1,
we have x1 times x2.
But this is not important.
The issue is that x1
is a projection of x.
And we are assuming that the
size is roughly the square root
of the size of x.
But why is it not concentrated?
In order to apply
this and conclude,
we need to know that
x is not concentrated
with u equals to t over 2.
So it's very
similar to the issue
that we had when we
needed to iterate.
So we knew that a plus
little aA is large.
But we didn't know that the
non-concentration condition also
improves.
It's a similar issue here.
We know something about the
size of these projections,
but a priori, we
don't know anything
about the non-concentrated.
We need these projections
to be non-concentrated.
OK, so maybe ignore all of this,
and just say the following.
Using Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
many times in a clever way,
we can reduce to the case where
the set x is a product set.
You can even assume it's a
product set of something,
a self product set.
So using Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
as many times,
we can assume that
x is x1 times x2.
And then using
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers again,
so Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
allows us
to go back and forth between
dense subsets and just
everything.
So this is what allows us to do.
So we can assume that we are in
the setting of a product set.
And then we want to apply this.
But not so fast,
because we don't
know that the
projections satisfy
the non-concentration
assumption a priori.
So we have this problem again.
So it's very similar to
the problem we had before.
And it is solved
in a similar way.
But it has to be solved.
So in some sense, so you
can think of it in this way.
We say that t over 2 is a
trivial between [INAUDIBLE]
bound for projections.
What we have to show is that
this trivial bound actually
holds in the
non-concentration sense.
So here, 0, 1, and infinity
are just generic projections.
In fact, if we pick
three random points in D,
this will work, because three
random points will be separated.
Three random points will not
be too concentrated because
of this.
There are not too many
points in a single ball.
So if you randomly
sample three points in D,
the linear map that
makes these points
horizontal, and
vertical, and diagonal,
will have small distortion.
So we need to know that
the random projection of x
is a delta T over 2 S set.
In some sense, the
goal is to show
that the random projection
is a delta t over 2
plus some gain S set.
But to prove that,
we need to show
that it satisfies
the same thing,
but without the epsilon, but
the non-concentration version
of that.
And this can be done.
It can be done in several ways.
One way is a similar thing
to what we have done today.
Well, today and last time.
But basically, go from
growth to non-concentration
by uniformizing
everything carefully.
And it can also be done by
some careful double counting,
similar to, but not exactly the
same that you've done before.
So there are several ways
of doing it, because it's
like the easy case.
But it has to be done.
OK, so maybe let's
write that down.
OK, so we need a last fact.
If x and D are as before, as in
Bourgain's projection theorem,
then there exists some A and
D. And once again, once we know
that there is one A and D, that
means nearly all A and D have
this property such
that pi of x contains
a delta t over 2 delta 2, maybe
O of epsilon, O of eta set.
Again, t over 2 is
like the trivial bound.
But it's not so
trivial in this case,
because we are claiming
some concentration
for the projection.
But because at the same
time, for covering number,
so for the covering
number version of this
is sort of obvious, because
again, if we have one set,
you look at two projections
in more or less orthogonal
directions, and
most one of them can
drop by more than square
root of the size of the set.
And this is true at every scale.
So you see that if we
knew that this is uniform,
we would be done.
So it's really very similar to
what we have been discussing
in the rest of the lecture.
So this can be proved
using a similar strategy
as for A plus aA.
Or it can also be done
without using uniformization
by double counting.
So OK.
OK, maybe not uniformization.
But if one doesn't
use uniformization,
maybe one needs some
of Ruzsa's lemma.
But OK, so it can be done.
But I just wanted to
point out that this is yet
another place where we need
to worry about the fact that,
so the difference between
the Euclidean setting
and the finite-field setting.
OK.
OK, and now, once we
know this, we are really
done, because using
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
three times, we can assume
that x is a Cartesian product.
And we just need to know that
the prediction in a given
direction grows, and
it is given by this.
And then we apply double star.
OK, so since there
are five minutes left,
let me summarize
what's been going on.
So what is the idea, the
general idea of the proof,
both in the finite-field setting
and the Euclidean setting,
first, we work with the
set in one dimension,
and shows that if the set
is not already everything,
then it's expanded
by some polynomial.
Then we simplify the polynomial
using Plunnecke-Ruzsa.
Then we iterate.
In order to iterate, one has to
be much, much, much more careful
in the Euclidean
setting in order
to show that the
hypothesis of the expansion
are satisfied when we
apply the growth once.
So we can iterate.
But eventually, we can iterate.
That means that we can expand
the given set A to almost
everything by some polynomial.
Once we can expand by
polynomial to almost everything,
we get this growth.
It is still of
some product type,
but the difference is that x
now can be much bigger than A.
And the fact that x is
much bigger than A is not
an issue, because instead
of working with A,
we work with a polynomial
applied to A, which has
size bigger than the size of x.
And finally, we want to
project something which is not
a product, but by looking
at three projections
to begin with, which are
far away from each other,
and applying
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
many times, we can go
back to this setting.
So that's the short
version of the proof.
And they are, again, in
the Euclidean setting,
one has to be careful to show
that the projections satisfy
the assumptions needed
to apply this fact.
So really, you need at
least some concentration
on x, because again, if x
was a small interval, then
this never grows for any A. So
one needs some assumption on x.
So one needs to prove
something like that.
But OK, one can prove it, and
then eventually, one uses this.
Any final questions?
AUDIENCE: How many
times have we used BSG?
PABLO SHMERKIN: So
either four or six.
I'm not completely sure.
No.
I think the first time,
we already have a product.
Yeah, I think once, for A plus
little aA, and then three times
to reduce to this setting.
AUDIENCE: Is it for when we
just want the projection of x
itself is big in one direction?
Or it's like for the
proof that's [INAUDIBLE]?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yeah, OK.
So in the finite-field
setting, as you are suggesting,
it's much easier to prove that
the projection of x itself
is big than proving
it for dense subsets.
But in the Euclidean
case, even if your goal
is proving that the
projection of x is large,
and you don't care
about dense subsets,
you are still forced to
care about dense subsets
because you need the
dense subsets to prove
the non-concentration
assumption when you iterate.
So how did we prove that A plus
little aA satisfies the stronger
non-concentration assumption?
By proving that the projection
of dense subsets of A times A
are large.
So even if your
ultimate goal doesn't
involve looking
at dense subsets,
you still need to look at
dense subsets along the proof.
And you cannot avoid that.
Or maybe you can, but at least
with this method of proof,
you cannot avoid that.
Yes.
AUDIENCE: Can you
say a little bit more
about how to handle the
issue that the uniform subset
at different scales
might be different?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Yeah.
So unfortunately, I didn't
realize this issue would arise.
So I didn't check carefully.
AUDIENCE: Oh, OK.
That's fine.
PABLO SHMERKIN: But yeah,
it's a very good question.
Yeah, OK.
So I'm not exactly
sure, but let me
say something that
might work in this case,
but it certainly
works in other cases.
So I explained an
idea superficially
of first getting an A prime.
And if that A prime
doesn't exhaust A,
we take it away, and
find another A prime.
One can do something
similar for uniform sets.
So rather than taking
one uniform subset,
so one is given a set, and one
knows nothing about that set.
And we can nearly
exhaust that set
by a finite union
of uniform subsets.
So one finds a
dense uniform set,
takes it away, finds another
uniform set, takes it away.
And in this way, we
essentially cover the set
with a very small error
by uniform subsets.
So this is one way to
get around the issue
that one uniform subset
itself is maybe too sparse.
And then a different scale is
different, things could happen.
So I think that
could be one way.
I don't think that's
what we do in the paper.
But I think that's one thing you
could do to bypass this issue.
AUDIENCE: You said last time
that there was possibly a way
to simplify this [INAUDIBLE].
PABLO SHMERKIN: We
are not sure yet.
We are hopeful.
Yes.
Yeah, again.
So Bourgain's original proof
is different in the sense
that he didn't construct an
expanding polynomial at all.
But it is similar in the sense
that he proves this, and then
uses the many
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers to get
the full statement.
But to prove this, he
did something different.
But OK.
Other claim is more difficult
than what I explained.
But I don't know.
Yeah, now, we have this
idea from last week
that, yeah, might be
a-- so basically, it
would be a much easier
way of doing this.
To go from this to
the full statement,
the only way we
know how to do it
is how Bourgain did it, by doing
the many Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.